*** Spacewar! 3.1 / 4.x Sense Switch Settings Demystified ***



There's some mystery about the actual workings of the sense switch controls in
Spacewar! -- and more rumors than actual information. This is an attempt to
clarify these based on the actual source code of Spacewar!. (Please note that
Spacewar 2B used other settings, see
<http://www.masswerk.at/spacewar/sources/spacewar_2b.txt>.)

This is an extensive survey of all the occurrences of the "szs" instruction,
which was the only way to access the current state of the sense switches of the
PDP-1 in code.


1) Short Version

In short, the sense switches have the following effect, if flipped to on:

	1: rotation using angular momentum
	2: low gravity
	3: torpedo salvos off (single shots)
	4: background starfield off
	5: gravitational star kills
	6: gravitational star off



2) Long Version -- A Closer Look Into the Source Code


2.01) The "skip on zero sense switch" Instruction

The "szs" instruction had the (octal) format 06400s0, where the "s" would give
the number of the sense switch. If the bit representing the switch was zero (low
state), the next instruction would be skipped. The presence of bit 5 (counting
from 0 at the very left), notated by the addition of "i" in the code, would
invert the condition (now skipping the next instruction, if the switch was set).


2.02) PDP-1 Instructions and Assembler Notation

The instructions for the Macro assembler are quite easy to read: All the values
in a line were summed up to give the instruction. A symbol followed by a comma
at the very beginning of a line would designate a label. A dot (.) indicates the
current memory position.

PDP-1 instructions are generally formed by a processing part at the highest 2
3-bit nibbles (first two octal numbers) and an address/value part at bits 6-17
(lower 4 octal numbers, giving an address space of 07777 or decimal 4096 18-bit
words). Symbols representing the operation like "szs" were directly translated
to numbers by the assembler (like 0640000 for "zs", or 0010000 for "i") and a
line of code like "szs i 20" would sum up to the instruction 0650020.

(Bit 5, "i", commonly known as the defer bit, had a different meaning with most
of the instructions, causing the contents of the location to be used for another
look-up, in potentially infinite recursion. So "dac i mom" means: Look up the
memory location labled "mom", take this value as the actual address and look this
one up. Now, if there is not another i-bit, deposit the contents of the accumula-
tor as the new contents of this address.)

A leading back-slash character indicates an upper stroke (not available in
standard ASCII), instructing the assmembler to use a variable for this symbol.
An opening bracket instructs the assembler to insert a constant for this value.
Any characters following a slash (/) are comments and skipped by the assembler.



2.1) The Code


* Sense switch 1 -- angular momentum

The location labeled "mom" points to the address containing the momentum of the
current object. If sense switch 1 is set, the next instruction, a jump to label
"sr8", is skipped (condition inverted by "i").
If not set, the momentum is set to zero and the Accumulator (holding the value
of the current momentum) is shifted to the left by 7 bits, effectively clearing
the address part of it. "sr8" labels the next instruction, following immediately
to this. So, if switch 1 is set and the clearing is skipped, the momentum will
keep building up.


	mom,	add .
		dac i mom
		szs 10
		jmp sr8
		dzm i mom
		ral 7s
	sr8,	ril 1s

		...


* Sense switch 2 -- low gravity

Inside the code following label "mth" (part of updating a ships position), the
"szs" instruction is skipped if sense switch 2 is set (the "i" effectively
inverts the condition). "scr 2s" shifts the accumulator right by 2 bits,
dividing its value by 4. (So low gravity is a fourth of the normal amount.)


	mth,
		...

		szs i 20		/ switch 2 for light star
		scr 2s


* Sense switch 3 -- torpedo salvos off (single shots)

The code loads the previous control word into the accumulator. (The actual
address of this being set in an other part of the program.) The acummulator
is then complemented (bits flipped) by the "cma" instruction". If sense switch
3 is set (condition inverted by the "i"), the next instruction ("clc") is
skipped. The "clc" instruction clears and complements the value in the accumu-
ator (now 0777777 or minus zero). The "ral" instruction rotates the value in
the accumulator 3 bits to the left, so that the bit indicating a launch of a
torpedo would now be in the sign-bit position (first bit from the left).

If the sign-bit is set, the "no launch"-jump is skipped ("sma" instruction).
So the torpedo will only be launched, if the sign-bit is set.
Thus the "clc" instruction effects in a continous fire operation, since it
flips all bits to hi, including what will be then the sign-bit, indicating a
negative value. This will be skipped by the "szs i 30" and the torpedo-flag
will be only set, if there was actually a control input.


	mco,	lac .		/ previous control word
		cma
		szs i 30
		clc
		ral 3s		/ torpedo bit to bit 0
		sma
		jmp sr5		/ no launch


Note: Spacewar 3.1 misses to ever store the value of the control word in the
location "mco" is pointing to, leaving this without effect.
Spacewar 4.x fixes this by the following instructions at label "sr5" (the value
in "scw" being the current control word):

	sr5,	lac \scw
		dac i mco

For this salvos are permanently on in Spacewar 3.1 and sense switch 3 is without
effect. (Since the location "mco" is pointing to will be zero, the first "cma"
will be effecting in the same as the skipped "clc" -- clear and complement AC.)


* Sense switch 4 -- background starfield off

The code labled "bck" causes the code to exit early, effictively skipping the
"isp" instruction (index and skip) following the "jmp" to the return address,
wich was deposited in the address part of the location labeled "bcx" by the
first "dap" instruction.
As can bee seen from the macro "background", the label "bck" is the entry to the
entire background display sub-routine.


	/background display _  3/13/62, prs.

		define 
	background
		jsp bck
		termin

	bck,	dap bcx
		szs 40
		jmp bcx
		isp bcc
	bcx,	jmp .


* Sense switch 5 -- gravitational star kills

The routine labeled "pof" handles a ship colliding with the gravitational star.
The first two instructions are just resetting the x and y positions to zero,
putting the ship in the very center of the screen. If sense switch 5 is not set,
the instruction causing a jump to the code initializing the explosion is skipped.
Instead, the value 0377777 (indicating the extreme position of the internal map)
is loaded into the accumulator, and the ship is set to the anti-pode by
depositing this as the current coordinates of the ship.


	/ spaceship in star

	pof,	dzm i \mdx
		dzm i \mdy
		szs 50
		jmp po1
		lac (377777
		dac i mx1
		dac i my1
		lac i mb1
		dac \ssn
		count \ssn, .
		jmp mb1

	po1,	lac (mex 400000	/ now go bang


* Sense switch 6 -- gravitational star off

The code at label "blp" deposits the return address in the address part of
the location labeled "blx". Sense switch 6 set will result in an immediate
return, skipping the entire sub-routine.

	/display a star

		...

	blp,	dap blx		/star
		szs 60
		jmp blx

		...

	blx,	jmp .

Moreover, sense switch 6 is also checked in the main loop, skipping the jump to
the code labeled "bsg", if not set. The code following to this is the code for
calculating the influence of gravity on the ships and the code handling any
colissions with the sun. The code labeled "bsg" picks up the updating process of
the ships by updating the amount of fuel left.
If there is no gravitaional star, there's also no gravity.

	mth,
		...
		szs 60
		jmp bsg




3) Modifications: Sense Switch 2 in Spacewar! 4.3 and 4.4 -- "Twin Star Mode"

There is only a single deviation from this scheme, to be found in listings of
Spacewar 4.3 and Spacewar 4.4. These are introducing a special twin-star-mode
featuring a visual displacement of the display locations. This relocation is
done in a routine labled "kcb", commented "relocate for center display".
This relocated mode is controlled by sense switch 2, so there is no option for
low gravity. Sense switch 2 is checked multiple times in these versions of
Spacewar, once for every object displayed.

The first time we encounter this in a macro definition used to activate a single
location of the display, like a single blip. The "repeat" pseudo instruction is
executed in the Macro assembler only and is not effecting in any code.
Instead, a value of B multiplied by 6 (or shifted 6 bits to the left) will be
inserted in the code produced by it. The "szs" instruction will skip the "jda"
instruction, which jumps to the sub-routine doing the relocation (see below).

("jda" means: deposit the contents of the accumulator in the location given in
the address part of the instruction and jump-sub to the location immediately
following this address.)

So, if sense switch 2 is not set, the "dpy" addressing the display instruction
is executed normally, with the x and y coordinates unchanged in the accumulator
and the IO register. If sense switch 1 is set, the coordinates will be relocated
by the jump to the sub-routine at "kcb".

		define
	dispt A,Y,B
		repeat 6, B=B+B
		lio Y
		szs 20
		jda kcb
		dpy-A+B
		term

The same scheme occurs in the code for the background display (starfield):

	fyn,	lio	/lio Y
		szs 20
		jda kcb
		dpy-i

and in the code generating the visuals of the explosions:

	/ explosion
		...
		szs 20
		jda kcb
		dpy-i 300
		...

Last but not least, sense switch 2 is checked in the the code setting up the
locations of the outlines of the spaceships.

Here, the internal values representing the x and y positions of the first
spaceship (held in nx1 and ny1 respectively) are subtracted from the current
values, if sense switch 2 is set. Thus the display locations will be relocated
in a way that spaceship 1 (the "needle") will be tied to the center and
spaceship 2 (the "wedge") will be displaced by the same amount (starting at the
lower left corner of the display).

The third and final occurence in this part of the code follows the usual scheme
described above.

	bsg,
		...
		szs 20
		sub nx1
		...
		szs 20
		sub ny1
		...
		szs 20
		jda kcb
		dpy-4000


A closer look at sub-routine "kcb" reveals, how the relocation is done.
First, the address part of the contents of the accumulator holding the return
address is dumped into the location labled "kc1".
The "swap" macro (two "rcl 9s" instructions) swaps the contents of the
accumulator and the IO register. Then the y-position of the first spaceship (in
the location given by "nx1") is subtracted from this. Another swap moves the
result back into the IO register. The "lac" instruction restores the original
contents of the acummulator (previously stored at "kcb" by the "jda" instruction
triggering the jump). Now the x-coordinate of the first spaceship is subtracted
from the accumulator, followed by a jump to the return address.


		kcb,	0		/relocate for center display
			dap kc1
			swap
			sub ny1
			swap
			lac kcb
			sub nx1
		kc1,	jmp .


This effects in the origin of the display (at the center of the scope) being
relocated to the position of spaceship 1. Rather than moving on the display, the
"needle", being tied to the origin, will push the whole universe by its movement.

In order to make room for the "needle", the central gravitational star has to
move from the origin. In order to do so, the central star is duplicated to the
very left and right of the origin, when in twin-star-mode.

Interestingly the sense switch is not checked for this by the use of the "szs"
instruction, but by the use of the "szf" instruction meant for a conditional
skip based on the state of a program falg. Anyway, this results in an identical
binary instruction (since "szs" and "szf" are using the same instruction code and
only differ in the position of the value indicating the switch or flag).
If sense switch 2 is not zero, the jump to the location "bjm-1", the "dpy"
instruction, is skipped. If the switch is set, the coordinates of spaceship 1 (in
the locations stored in nx1 and nx2) are subtracted and the star is relocated
before displayed. (The instruction "dpy-4000" effects in 0724007, a display
command in effect pretty much like a bare "dpy" -- we won't bother with the
subtleties in this context.)

	bpt,
		...
		szf i 20
		jmp bjm-1
		sub ny1
		swap
		sub nx1
		dpy-4000
	bjm,	jmp .


But why is the star duplicated by this?
Let's have another look at the whole construct:

	define
		starp
		add \bx
		swap
		add \by
		swap
		ioh
		dpy-4000
		terminate

		...
	
	bpt,	dap bpx
		random
		sar 9s
		sar 6s
		spa
		cma
		sal 3s
		add (bds
		dap bjm
		cla cli clf 6-opr-opr
		szf i 20
		jmp bjm-1
		sub ny1
		swap
		sub nx1
		dpy-4000
	bjm,	jmp .
	bds,	repeat 10, starp
		szf 6
	bpx,	jmp .
		stf 6
		cma
		swap
		cma
		swap
		jmp bjm
		
The sub-routine "bpt" displays the star as a single, rotating line.
The insertion of the macro "random" puts an updated random value in the
accumulator. "sar 9s" and "sar 6s" shift this 15 bits to the right. "spa" skips
the next step, if the accumulator is plus (sign-bit not set). "cma" complements
the accumulator guaranteeing a positive value in the accumulator.

"sal 3s" shifts the random value 3 bits to the left (multiplying it by 8) and
"add (bds" adds the location of label "bds" to it. This is then deposited in the
address part of location "bjm".
The location "bjm" is now holding a jump instruction to "bds" with a random
offset. The label "bds" is the start of a sequence of decimal 8 macro
instructions inserting code to display a dot by adding a random x/y offset (set
up previously). Incidentally the macro "starp" inserts a code of 8 instructions,
giving the explanation for the "sal 3s" above. ("bds" will jump to exactly the
start of any of the 8 incarnations of "starp". Since the shift by 15 bits to the
right of the random value limited the offset to 2 bits, the resulting line will
be 5-8 dots -- or rather: iterations of dx/dy -- long.)

The construct "cla cli clf 6-opr-opr" clears the accumulator and the IO register
and the program flag 6 in a single step. So the line will start at the origin
(with displacement by nx1 and ny1, if sense switch 2 is set) and will iterate
over \bx and \by to draw a line of a length resulting from the operations
above. At the end of this sequence, the "szf 6" instruction will skip the next
instruction, if program flag 6 is zero. Since the flag was cleared before,
the next instruction, a jump to the return address, is skipped.

The next instructions sets program flag 6, now making this the final run, and
complements the values in the accumulator and the IO registers. Since these
are providing the values for the x and y coordinates of the dpy instruction,
the second run, started by the final jump to "bds", will draw the line in the
opposite direction from the outside in.

If the star is positioned in the origin, as normal, this will result in the line
being extended to the other side of the origin. But if the star was displaced by
an offset, this will also result in inverting the offset, now drawing the second
half of the line at the opposite side of the origin, resulting in a second
incarnation of the gravitational star. (For this, the two stars will be animated
by a rotating line merley reaching out to one side from the center, and one
will be the mirror image of the other, flipped by the x and y axes.)




-- finis --



Norbert Landsteiner,
Vienna, 2014-05-13
http://www.masswerk.at
